How are folks doing?
This is going to be, this is going to start, I just
want to preface something.
This is going to start as a little bit of a tur
d in the punch bowl kind of presentation.
I want to promise you it's not going to end there.
This sub-conference is called At Science, and so I'm
doing a little bit of At Social Science today because I'm
a social scientist.
I'm a PhD student in communications at the University of Pennsylvania.
At protocol is really good for a couple of things for social
scientists.
First off, there's everything that Sophie just talked about, which is
fantastic, and I forgot to actually mention here, but in terms of
the experiments that enables you to run, if you have spoken to
any social scientist who is studying media effects on social media, they
will talk about that exact same complaint, which is we have absolutely
no control over what is going on, and so we are just
left to go through behavioral data.
But even within that, it's gotten a lot harder recently because
we're living in what some folks call the post-API
age, where following a bunch of stuff in the last five to
ten years, a bunch of APIs on most big social media platforms
were either made private, or if you are allowed to access them,
in the case of X, the rates are really exorbit
ant, or you have to get your, I think in the case
of TikTok, you have to get every specific part of your project
approved by TikTok, which does have a sort of chilling effect, right,
if you want to ask these really kind of critical questions, and
you have to go to TikTok and say, hey, I want to
ask really critical questions about you, will you give me permission?
It's kind of an awkward process, or you have to use
something like Meta's content library, which is the official way
you can look at like Facebook and Instagram information, and the problem
with the platform like that is that it does, you have to
do everything through a custom browser that they have, because they're
really worried in the wake of Cambridge Analytica about how folks
use their data, and that is a good concern to have, but
the way their solution ends up working really limits the amount of
data analysis you're able to do, so it's not great,
and one of the really nice benefits of ad protocol, permission spaces
notwithstanding, is that because everything is public, you kind of
avoid all of those concerns about pricey, hard-to-use, or
hard-to-access data.
But the second thing, and this is what I think is more
interesting, is that it qualitatively changes the type of question you
're able to ask.
So I'm coming from the political economy of communications, where we
ask questions about how does the ownership of different media systems affect
the type of media that is produced.
They've asked a lot of really interesting questions in the past.
There's a lot of stuff, there's a whole literature that
I won't go into here, looking into like how does commercial
media funding affect the nature of journalism, what sort of effects does
it have on a democratic society, all these really important questions, and
folks have done really good thinking about what that means for social
media, but there's kind of never been an A-B comparison
you can make, right?
If you look at journalism, you can say, look, there are some
newspapers that are funded by advertisers, there are some that are more
publicly funded, but on social media, in the last 20 years, it
's mostly been the same handful of dominant players, all of whom
are operating as privately owned corporations, where they have the same incentive
set, and there's very little you can do.
With Blue Sky existing, though, you can start to ask these questions
about like what would a different model look like, and so a
great example of this is some work looking at the different third-
party services offered on Blue Sky, and it's kind of a
digital ethnography and a little bit of a qualitative project, but
their main finding is that if you look at feeds, starter packs,
moderation lists, and labels, there is not a lot of financial modern
ization.
I don't think this will be a huge surprise to most
of the folks in this room, but most of these things are
built because, hey, I'm part of a community, I care about
this community, I want to go build this tool for them.
I think many of the presentations that we've heard today, that
's how they start is I wanted this thing to exist and
I went and built it, and that is great and that is
not necessarily a bad thing, but it does change kind of qualitative
ly the type of network that we're working within.
There's also this point about supply often outstripping
demand.
A lot of folks will go and build a specific tool for
themselves.
I know many folks here have went and built a feed because
they wanted to see one thing specific.
The side effect of that, though, is that most, if you look
at where users are actually spending their time, a lot of them
are just using whatever defaults are promoted to them through Blue
Sky or using a handful of larger actors.
Which brings me to my question, which is how decentralized is Blue
Sky, really?
Like, we're a decentralized network, right?
That's what we're here for.
We're decentralized.
That's what we talk about.
Now, I want to say I'm building this work.
Balduf et al., who wrote one of the first academic
papers I could find on Blue Sky, did a similar measurement of
handles in 2024 and then a guy named Kuba Suter,
who I have not met, I do not know, but I learned
that he did a lot of this data analysis similarly, literally yesterday.
So a shout out to him.
He has a live feed of a similar version of this data
because I'm always, this presentation is going to be a lot
of me getting nerd sniped.
Okay, there are a couple ways you can measure decentralization and
this is where I leave a little asterisk there because
this is out of date.
I would like a more rigorous way to go through this and
so since there are out proto developers here, I thought if anyone
would know how to do this in a better way, it would
be you guys.
The first is you go to the relay, you say, hey, can
you give me your list of hosts?
We go to the hosts, we say, hey, can you give us
a list of repos you're storing and you measure that.
Now, the problem is not every personal data server is going to
give you a list of repos.
It's not always going to be accurate and it's not
always going to tell you if that user is active and so
the second way you do it is you go to PLC,
you say, hey, can I scrape every action that has ever been
taken and then from those actions, you say, hey, when is the
last time each user updated where their data is stored and you
combine that and the number you get is something like 99.
7% of all accounts are owned by Blue Sky.
That seems pretty centralized but okay, I know what you're saying.
I know what every single one of you is saying but Billy,
my name is Billy, by the way, hi.
But Billy, it might be centralized but in practice, the people who
are really spending time on the network, the folks who are posting
every day, who are liking stuff, who are getting followed, those are
us.
We're the cool people and we go and we host our
own data.
So clearly, if you look in practice, it's not going to
be the same.
That's a great point.
And so another way you can do it is you can look
at the fire hose.
You say, okay, let's look at the fire hose.
Let's look at sample over the course of an hour or
a day or a week and let's see how much activity
is coming in and let's see for that activity who is
being followed, who is being liked, and who is posting.
And does that activity, is that more decentralized?
So you do that, you resolve the ID, you look at the
follows.
It's not great.
99.
9% of follows are going to accounts hosted on Blue Sk
ies PDS.
Same with likes.
The promising one is that if you look at posts, just over
1% of posts are made by folks who are self-host
ing or using another place to host their data.
This is the turd and the punch bowl part of the
presentation.
Now, I want to talk about a few other things, which is
in talking about the atmosphere and talking about Blue Sky, we often
talk about a credible exit or, as I like to think about
it, like what would happen if 2022 Twitter happened tomorrow?
And there are a couple other concerns.
This is the continuation of the turd.
The first one is a lack of adoption and a challenge with
funding.
I think we are all aware of this.
Paul Frazee, in his recent February, 2026, he wrote
a little bit about this, how I think it is well understood
that most of this stuff is still being owned and hosted by
Blue Sky and that does present a certain level of problem.
And that gets back to the paper I was referencing earlier, where
oftentimes we are really, we are building these economies, but these economies
are based off of subcultural capital.
They're based on gifts.
And although I think there are really promising moves in projects like
Graze, the funding of these systems is not clear.
It's also not clear for a user what benefit they get
out of going out of their way to host their data somewhere
else.
That's not an easy solution.
And I think it also reminds us that the folks in this
room are going to be amongst the most technical users of Blue
Sky.
By way of example, a week ago I was visiting my grandparents.
Boy, I tried explaining what I was presenting this weekend to them.
I don't think a single part of it computed.
I love them dearly, but if we want to have this
as a protocol that serves everybody, we have to think about what
incentives folks have to be actually decentralized.
And this gets to the broader point of what the limits of
what a protocol can do.
A protocol is only as powerful as our willingness to follow what
the protocol says.
So if you think about it, if tomorrow Blue Sky Social, let
's say it went worse of the worst, Elon Musk took it
over tomorrow, and they said, we're actually not going to interface.
You can tell us that you want to migrate your data tough
nuggets, we're not going to let you do it.
There's nothing really we could do.
They could choose to hold on to your data.
They could choose to make the platform no longer interoperable
with anyone who's not hosted on Blue Sky Social directly.
It wouldn't be easy for them, but if they choose to
not follow the protocol, they don't have to.
And this brings me, if anyone here is a lawyer, I know
what the zero lawyers in this room are saying, but Billy, Blue
Sky is a public benefit corporation.
It's a great word.
It means that you are legally in the U.
S.
allowed to have a responsibility that is not purely financial.
First off, it is crazy that that needs to be specified.
But second of all, it is a really nice thing.
It's about a decade and a half old.
I think 2013, Delaware is the state where most American corporations, most
American businesses are incorporated, is in Delaware.
They started allowing it.
The challenge is, in 2019, there was a change in the law,
stick with me, that changed it from, if you want to go
from being a public benefit corporation, meaning you have some mission, to
not one of those anymore, it only requires 50% of your
shareholders to vote against that.
The consequence of that is we are now in a place where
if 50% of the folks who own Blue Sky decided to
no longer have a decentralized mission, they could do that tomorrow, and
there would be nothing you could do to stop them.
Which brings me to another point, I'm going to say this
really quietly because of the sponsors on the wall, we don't
know who owns Blue Sky.
That information is not public.
We know the list of people, but we do not know how
that is distributed amongst those different owners.
So it's a concern because if they wanted to tomorrow, the
entire protocol for everything valuable that's built, there is nothing keeping
that Blue Sky information from being re-siloed.
Okay, we're going to take a breath.
Let's talk about some good stuff.
First off, the move towards independently spinning off the PLC directory
is a really good one.
That will at least allow so that your identity can be shared
elsewhere.
I think that is a really promising first step.
The second thing is these data backups.
I met Fig briefly earlier in the elevator today.
Very nice person.
Like Hubble, are really valuable, right?
Because we want to be able to say, listen, not only can
I move my identity over, but I can also move the data
with that over.
So having these public backups is a really useful way of doing
that, especially for users who a priori might not think to
go out and make a copy of their data.
I also want to give a shout out to the folks in
this room who are working on building other forms of PDS
s.
I'm thinking of Black Sky.
I'm thinking of Euro Sky.
North Sky.
There are any number of these, but people really think, doing the
hard work of thinking about how do we build these other communities.
That is incredibly valuable and God willing, we can reach a decentral
ization through those efforts where this whole presentation is a moot
point.
And finally, all of you wonderful folks.
I want to be clear when I'm saying all this.
I'm just trying to be honest about the situation that we
find ourselves in.
I do not think this is a foregone conclusion, nor do
I think these are unsolvable problems.
And so I'm really, I've been really motivated over the
last couple days speaking to everybody and seeing how much everyone cares.
Of course, I said I got nerd sniped and nine days
before this presentation, Lawrence Hoff wrote a blog post about exactly this.
So thanks for sitting with me while I repeated stuff that he
mentioned.
I really like this quote of him and I'm going to
abuse Scott, your metaphor about the party.
Not only do we have a good party set up, I think
we have a great party going.
The problem is everyone's stuck in the kitchen.
It's getting a little cramped in here and we really
love it if some people moved to the living room, some people
moved to the balconies.
You've actually got a little bit more spaced out.
That's my presentation.
Thanks, guys.
Thanks, Billy.
Any questions?
Hey, I'm Daniel.
I do protocol stuff at Blue Sky.
Don't worry, you're not offending any of us by
saying this.
We basically agree with you.
And I'm talking about very similar stuff in my talk on
Sunday.
One of my questions is, like, there's sort of this logical
impossibility.
Like, we want the network to decentralize more.
There's sort of this logical impossibility for Blue Sky decentral
izing it.
Like, you almost need other parties to step in and take power
and authority and control in the network.
So, what do you think can encourage people to do that more?
First off, it's really nice to meet you.
I've read your stuff.
I've read a lot of people's stuff in this room.
Absolutely.
I really was hoping I would end this presentation with a slide
of here's all the things we can do.
I think part of, but what I've thought about it more,
again, I'm coming from a social science background.
One of the things I want to push us towards thinking about
just as a community is all of the, you know, we're
talking about so-so technical systems, all the social ways that these
networks are built up.
And so I think my point here is not that there's
an easy solution and I really wish there was.
I can kind of spitball ideas against the wall.
My point is more so to say that I think there is,
just to make the point that there's a limit to what
we can do with the protocol is really valuable and there's
a lot of stuff that can be done, but that is insufficient
to do it on its own.
Now, I could start daydreaming with you.
There's really good proposals with folks I've worked with and
folks I've seen.
Looking at like local acre institutions, so could we have, you know,
public funding towards like local hosting of this?
I mean, this is an ideal world where the government landscape looks
different than it currently is and the funding landscape is different.
There are questions about kind of, it's that kind of civil
society question of can we rethink models and funding of social media
and that goes again in this long history of debates about like
public funding of journalism, for example.
Those are some of my more optimistic takes and I would love
to talk more after this.
But generally, I do think we run into this issue where there
's just a limit to what we can do technically.
Anyone else?
That was awesome.
Thank you.
I am Jeremy Miller.
I'm actually the original board member on Blue Sky and I
can tell you just in words, right?
I can't promise it, but I would put my reputation behind
everybody on the board, everybody involved is fully behind this decentralized distributed
mission.
So, as much as all the things you said are true, we
are fully behind this and we believe in it.
I want to be, thank you so much.
I want to be very clear, none of this is attacking anyone.
I'm just trying to think through what is the worst case
scenario if like, you know, asteroid came, asteroid came crashing into Earth
tomorrow or Elon Musk came in and said, hey, how much money
to have Blue Sky 2?
Just thinking through that stuff.
Absolutely.
Yep.
Last questions?
All right, let's thank Billy again.
These are also great things to think about
in the unconference, which we'll be starting in about 10
minutes, I guess.
So, if you have, yeah, ideas, you can put post-it notes
on the boards in the back and when we meet in about
10 minutes, we'll come and cluster around topics that we're
interested in and probably in this room, maybe like six groups or
so.
So, yeah, feel free to take a break, be back in 10
minutes and, yeah, last session of AT&T.